---
title: Diode
en: Diode
sv: Diod

tags:
  - electronics
  - components

---

A diode is an active electronic component that limits the direction of current.

---

# Characteristics

Current can normally only pass through from the the anode, to the the cathode,
meaning that the voltage from anode to cathode must be positive to conduct.
When this is the case, the diode is *forward biased*.

```
Anode              Cathode
  o-------|>|---------o
```

A conducting diode will drop voltage from anode to cathode. This is known as a
forward voltage, or a voltage drop. In order for the diode to conduct, the
voltage must exceed the forward voltage. The amount of voltage drop is inherent
to the type of diode used. Most conventional diodes have a voltage drop of
about 0.7V.

**Not conducting**
```
+0.3V            0V
  o-------|>|----o
```

**Conducting**
```
+3V          +2.3V
 o-----|>|-----o
```

If the voltage at the cathode exceeds the voltage at the anode, the diode is
*reverse biased* and won't conduct unless it's either a [zener
diode](#Zener_diodes), or if it's pushed so hard it breaks. If a diode breaks,
it can result in the diode not conducting under any circumstances, or it can
short entirely. Diodes breaking is generally considered bad for circuit health.

The humble [1N4148 silicon
diode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1N4148_signal_diode) will for example
stand up to 100V of voltage from cathode to anode, but will only handle a few
hundred mA of current even in forward voltage.

---

# Applications

Applications for diodes include rectifying alternating current to direct
current, distorting sound, limiting voltage, and emitting light.

## AC rectification

## Voltage protection

## DC direction protection

## In audio

*N.B.: This section needs some peer review and concrete, verifiable examples.*

Diodes interact wonderfully with audio signals and are mostly used to create
various distorting effects. Although diodes do not achieve the same "authentic"
overdrive that is caused by literally pushing an amplifying circuit to its
limit, the right selection and application of diodes will very frequently
achieve nearly indistinguishable results.

### Analogue octave up

The simplest, but probably least common usage of diodes in audio processing, is
to simply run the signal across a diode. This will make a half-wave rectifier
and cut all negative parts of the signal. While the fundamental frequency for a
stable wave will remain the same, the harmonic emphasis will be drastically
altered.

Using either four diodes or a transformer/op-amp and two diodes, we can instead
create a full wave rectifier. Though a full-wave rectifier is normally used to
turn always positive relative to neutral in order to create DC, we can opt to
not add AC filtering diodes to instead just get the doubled frequency of the
rectified wave.

A four-diode rectifier is arguably the simpler design, but using a centre-tap
transformer or an op-amp allows reducing the amount of diodes to two, which
makes for a less distorted effect as there is less forward voltage to overcome.
By creating an inverted signal and then running both the original and the
inverted signals through their own half-wave rectifiers before summing them, a
full-wave rectification is achieved, of which the fundamental frequency is
twice what the input's was.

For pure octave effects, diodes with low forward voltages are strongly
preferred. If more distortion is desired, other diodes may be of greater
interest.

### Gate

Running a signal through two diodes in parallel, one forward-biased and one
reverse-biased, will cause the signal to go through so long as the forward
voltage is met, both on the positive and negative duty cycles. Since this will
cut the signal during the transition from positive to negative and vice versa,
it will be a distorted gate sound, sharing some similarities to old
transistor-based fuzzes.

### Distortion

By running the signal to ground through a two-way diode gate, any voltage above
the forward voltage will run to ground and the wave will effectively have its
top and bottom cut off. This creates a classic pedal distortion.

By instead doing this with the negative feedback loop of an op-amp, the op-amp
will achieve a similar but less harsh effect. This is more akin to a pedal
overdrive.

In these circuits, the switching speed of the diode influences the harshness of
the distortion. Although germanium diodes have a very low forward voltage and
cut the most off a signal, they will produce fewer harmonics.

---

# Diode types

## Silicon diodes

## Germanium diodes

## Light-emitting diodes

## Schottky diodes

## Zener diodes

