---
title: Filter
en: Filter (signal processing)
sv: Filter (signalbehandling)

tags:
  - signal processing
  - audio effects

related:
  - inductor
  - capacitor
---

A filter is a process that removes frequencies from a signal.

# In audio

## Filter or equaliser?

An important thing to remember about filtering a signal is that once something
is removed, it cannot be re-added. In recording, it is therefore often
preferable to record without any filters cutting into the content of the audio
source. Attenuating EQ is a milder choice that can be undone.

## Envelope filter

A common effect especially used for synthesisers and pornographic film
soundtracks is a resonant low-pass filter of which the frequency follows the
envelope (the volume) of the input signal, meaning transients open the filter
making for a more percussive sound, as the sustain of a tone is restricted to
low frequencies. An excellent example of an envelope filter in metal is
[Dragonaut by Sleep](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wai9kq9kww).

An auto-wah is a form of envelope filter that uses a band-pass filter instead
of a low-pass filter. Other types of filters are less commonly used with
envelopes.

# Types

## Low-pass filter

Frequencies below the cutoff point pass, frequencies above the cutoff point are
removed.

A low pass filter may be used to remove AC, oftentimes with the purpose of
removing noise from DC power.

## High-pass filter

Frequencies above the cutoff point pass, frequencies below the cutoff point are
removed.

A high pass filter may be used to remove DC, as it is effectively a 0Hz signal.

## Band-pass filter

Frequencies within a certain band pass, frequencies outside the band are
removed. A band pass filter can be constructed by combining a low-pass filter
and a high-pass filter.

A common application for band-pass filters is the [wah](/grimoire/wah), which
sweeps a resonant band-pass filter.

## Band-reject filter

Frequencies outside a certain band pass, frequencies inside the band are
removed.

## All-pass filter

No frequencies are removed. However, [phase](/grimoire/phase) is altered around
a target frequency.

# Implementations
## Passive filter

Passive filters are most commonly constructed using capacitors and resistors.
Inductors can be used too, though they are less commonly used due to cost and
size.

## Active filter

An active filter combines filters with active electronics, which can boost a
signal. This lets one create EQ, shelves, etc.

## Digital filter

Filters can be created digitally and can achieve things not easily done with
electronic processing. They are also perfectly consistent, which cannot be said
for electronic filters.

Linear-phase filters, i.e. filters that do not alter signal phase, can be made
using digital signal processing. Their drawback is that they introduce a slight
signal delay. A common application for linear-phase filters is in the use of
[crossovers](/grimoire/audio-crossover).
